\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-

@setfilename fsimp.info
@settitle Package fsimp

@ifinfo
@macro var {expr}
<\expr\>
@end macro
@end ifinfo

@dircategory Mathematics/Maxima
@direntry
* Package fsimp: (maxima) Maxima share package fsimp
@end direntry

@menu
* Introduction to package fsimp::
* Functions and Variables for fsimp::
@end menu
@node Top, Introduction to package fsimp, (dir), (dir)
@top

@menu
* Introduction to package fsimp::
* Functions and Variables for fsimp::

@detailmenu
 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

* Introduction to package fsimp::
* Functions and Variables for fsimp::

@end detailmenu
@end menu


@chapter Package fsimp

@node Introduction to package fsimp, Functions and Variables for fsimp, Top, Top
@section Introduction to package fsimp

The @code{fsimp} package provides a 'fullsimp' simplification function
for expressions.  This code was adapted from David Scherfgen's
dssimp.mac code posted on the Maxima discussion list.

This code implements a simplification routine for Maxima CAS
expressions using the core simplification routines for expressions
invovling trigonometric, logarithmic, exponential, polynomial and
other functions.

To use the package, place the files in your maxima search path and

load("fsimp.mac");

To simplify an expression @code{expr} call

@code{fullsimp(expr);}

The algorithm begins by searching through an expression for e.g. trig,
log, exp, etc. and choosing a set of core simplification
routines. Then it runs a poor-man's kind of simulated annealing
routine. It's poor-man's because it's not really simulated annealing,
but while it cycles through various core simplification routines
(several times) it allows the intermediate expression to become
slightly larger if it ultimately becomes smaller. The output is always
the smallest size expression, where the size is computed by the lisp
@code{consize} function plus the string length of the expression.

E. Majzoub.

@node Functions and Variables for fsimp, , Introduction to package fsimp, Top
@section Functions and Variables for fsimp

@defvr {Variable} fsdebug
Setting the variable @code{fsdebug} to 1 will allow the user to see
the fsimp function operations, list selection of simplification routines, etc.
@end defvr

@anchor{fullsimp}
@deffn {Function} fullsimp (@code{expr},[simp1,simp2,...])
The @code{fullsimp} function takes an input expression @code{expr} and
attempts to find a simpler form using the builtin simplification
routines in core Maxima. These include: @code{[resimplify, expand,
combine, radcan, ratsimp, rootscontract, xthru, multthru, factor,
sqrtdenest, triglist,exptlist, loglist]}. Additional trigonometric
simplifications are applied as well. The full list of simplifications
is shown in the variable @code{simplist} which will be shown if
the variable @code{fsdebug} is set to 1.

There are two ways to manipulate the simplifications in @code{simplist}.
First, the option arguments to @code{fullsimp}, @code{simp1, simp2,
etc.} are simplification routines the user wants @emph{excluded} from
@code{simplist}.

Second, the user may create a @emph{list} called @code{fs_custom_simp},
and place any user defined simplification routines. For example the
code

@code{fs_custom_simp:[lambda([q], block([algebraic : true], ratsimp(q)))]}

will create a simplification routine where the variable @code{algebraic} is
set to @code{true}, while the @code{ratsimp} simplification is applied.

In general, @code{fullsimp} tries to find the smallest equivalent
expression based on the Common Lisp @code{conssize} and string size of
an expression.

The user may manipulate the order of simplifications through
use of the exclusion option and the custom simplification option.

@code{fullsimp} is a simplifying function and can be added to the
command line as shown in the last example below.
@end deffn

@example
@group
(%i1) load("fsimp.mac")$ 
(%i2) fullsimp((1+cos(t))/sin(t)); 
                                        t
(%o2)                               cot(-)
                                        2
(%i3) fullsimp(cos(x)+%i*sin(x)); 
                                      %i x
(%o3)                               %e
(%i4) (cos(t)+1)/((%i*sin(p)-cos(p))*sin(t)),fullsimp; 
                                    %i p     t
(%o4)                           - %e     cot(-)
                                             2
@end group
@end example

If you wish to exclude particular simplification routines,
add them to the arguments of fullsimp as shown below.

@example
@group
(%i1) load("fsimp.mac")$ 
(%i2) fullsimp((1+cos(t))/sin(t),fstrigsimp,trigsimp,trigreduce); 
                                  cos(t) + 1
(%o2)                             ----------
                                    sin(t)
@end group
@end example


@node Function and Variable Index, , Top, Top
@appendix Function and Variable index
@printindex fn
@printindex vr

@bye
